# Unreal Functions and Objects

## Table of Contents

- [Unreal Library](#unreal-library)
- [Unreal Math Library](#unreal-math-library)
- [Unreal Objects](#unreal-objects)
  - [TSubclassOf\<T\>](#tsubclassof-t)
  - [Multicast Delegate](#multicast-delegate)
  - [Constructors](#constructors)
  - [Precompiler Macros](#precompiler-macros)
  - [Logging](#logging)
  - [GameFramework Library Objects](#GameFramework-Library-Objects)
  - [Damage](#damage)
- [Kismet Library](#kismet-library)
- [Actors](#actors)
  - [Spawning Actors](#spawn-actors)
  - [Actor](#actor-classes)
  - [Pawn](#apawn--aactor)
  - [Character](#acharacter--apawn)
  - [Controller](#controllers)
- [Camera](#camera)
- [Components](#components)
  - [Component Base Classes](#component-base-classes)
  - [UCharacterMovementComponent](#UCharacterMovementComponent)
- [GameMode](#gamemode)
  - [GameModeBase](#gamemodebase)
  - [GameMode](#gamemode--gamemodebase)
- [Level](#level)
- [Particles](#particles)
- [Sound](#sound)
- [Timer](#timer)
- [Trace](#trace)
- [Volume](#volume)
- [World](#uworld)

---

# Unreal Library

### Structs

- `FName`
  - `Name_None` is FName null equivalent

### Classes

 - `FString`
  - If passing to `%s` token, need to dereference with `*` operator 

### Functions

 - `Destroy()`
 - `GetName()`
 - `GetOwner()`
 - `SetOwner()`

### DrawDebugHelpers.h
 - `DrawDebugLine()`
 - `DrawDebugSphere()`

## Unreal Math Library

- [Documentation](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Core/Math/)

### Structs

- `TVector` 
  - Vector type_def, can be 2, 3, 4 dimensional
  - FVector (float), also can be int32 typed
  - `GetSafeNormal` - Returns the normalized vector (aka amplitude of 1)

- `TRotator`
  - Similar to 3 dimensional TVector, but with rotation

- `FQuat` - Quaternion (aka Hamiltonion), like a 3D rotator but additional dimension prevents gimbal lock

### Functions

- `Lerp` - Performs Linear Interperlation between to values

# Unreal Objects

### Defining Objects

- Define a new Unreal C++ objects in the Editor, go to **Tools > New C++ Class**. Can be defined from any existing class.

## Unreal Object Lifecycle

### TSubclassOf<T>

- Generic `UClass` type that is a subclass of another Type. 

- Useful to reference classes in C++ which were defined in the Editor. (i.e. Blueprints) 

- Can use this to then call super methods or spawn BP objects

### Multicast Delegate

- Many-to-one delegate created via `DECLARE_DYNAMIC_MULTICAST_SPARSE_DELEGATE` precompiler macro.

- `Broadcast()` executes all delegate callbacks

- To get the call signature, need to look up the constructor macro in the Unreal header file

- Add callback with `DelegateName->AddDynamic()`

- **Note:** Callbacks passed to the delegate must be declared with **`UFUNCTION()`** macro

- **Example:** For Collision Delegate, first three parameters build the delegate property for UPrimitiveComponent. The rest are the Hit Component delegate signature

```cpp
/**
 * Delegate for notification of blocking collision against a specific component.  
 * NormalImpulse will be filled in for physics-simulating bodies, but will be zero for swept-component blocking collisions.
 */
DECLARE_DYNAMIC_MULTICAST_SPARSE_DELEGATE_FiveParams( FComponentHitSignature, UPrimitiveComponent, OnComponentHit, UPrimitiveComponent*, HitComponent, AActor*, OtherActor, UPrimitiveComponent*, OtherComp, FVector, NormalImpulse, const FHitResult&, Hit );
//... next declaration with differen params
```

### Constructors

- `UObject::CreateDefaultSubobject` 
  - Is only callable in a class constructor. 
  - It takes care of creating an instance of the CDO of the subobject's class, setting its outer class as the caller object, among other things. 
  - The created object then becomes the default object for the property when its object class is instantiated

- `NewObject<T>`
  - Function normally used to instansiate object after engine initialization, like during noraml gameplay.
  - Provides several convenience overloads to handle most scenarios.

- `UWorld::SpawnActor<T>`
  - Convenience method to spawn actors in a level with specified location, rotation, spawn collision settings, and checks to ensure it's a spawnable actor class.
  - Is just a convenience wrapper of `NewObject<AActor>`

- `ConstructObject` \[Deprecated\]
  - Use `NewObject<T>` instead

- [stackoverflow reference](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/60021804/unreal-engine-4-different-ways-to-instantiate-the-object)

## Precompiler Macros

### UCLASS()

- Needed for the C++ class to be recognized by the Unreal Engine editor.
- Automatically added if Class is generated by UE Editor

### UFUNCTION()

#### Parameters
- `BlueprintCallable` - Exposes functions to BP Editor
- `BlueprintPure` - often pared with `const` keyword on function
- `BlueprintImplementableEvent` - Exposes the object call as an Event in BP Editor
  - Basically a delegate method for the BP Editor to implement, but callable in C++. 
  - Does NOT require implementation in `.cpp` file 
  - **Can't be private**

### UPROPERTY()

#### Parameters
- `Category="foobar"` - puts the variable in a category name 
- `VisibleAnywhere` - Shows variable value in unreal editor (not editable)
- `VisibleInstanceOnly` - Visible only when instanced (in viewer Details window)
- `VisibleDefaultsOnly` - Visible only in default viewer (in Details window)
- `EditAnywhere` - Exposes variable for editing (has similar InstanceOnly, DefaultsOnly)
- `BlueprintReadWrite` - exposes in blueprint graph (get/set)
- `BlueprintReadOnly` - only exposes get
- `meta=()` - additional properties
  - `AllowPrivateAccess` = “true” use to expose private variable to blueprint

### Logging

- `UE_LOG(Category, Level, TEXT("Some Text"))`
  - [Unofficial Documentation](https://unrealcommunity.wiki/logging-lgpidy6i)
    - [Verbosity](https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.27/en-US/API/Runtime/Core/Logging/ELogVerbosity__Type/)
  - Level `Fatal` will log, then crash program
  - `ulog` - CAPTNCAPS shortcut

## GameFramework Library Objects

## Damage

Two primary event types:

### FPointDamageEvent : FDamageEvent

### FRadiaDamageEvent : FDamageEvent

## `UDamageType`
- `#include "GameFramework/DamageType.h"`
- A DamageType is intended to define and describe a particular form of damage and to provide an avenue for customizing responses to damage from various sources.For example, a game could make a DamageType_Fire set it up to ignite the damaged actor. 
- DamageTypes are never instanced and should be treated as immutable data holders with static code functionality. They should never be stateful.
- Can use `::StaticClass()` to get `TSublclassOf<UDamageType>` to get the damage type received

# Kismet Library

`#include "Kismet/GameplayStatics.h"`

- `GetWorldDeltaSeconds(this)`
  - can get DeltaTime outside of Tick function. 
  - **`this`** will pass in the context for the world via the instance’d object

- `GetPlayerPawn(const UObject* WorldContextObject, int32 PlayerIndex)`

- `GetPlayerController(const UObject* WorldContextObject, int32 PlayerIndex)`

- `ApplyDamage()`
  - will cause *`OnTakeAnyDamage`* to be called called on object
  - Example:
    ```cpp
    UGameplayStatics::ApplyDamage(OtherActor, ProjectileDamage, GetOwner()->GetInstigatorController(), this, UDamageType::StaticClass());
    ```

- `GetAllActorsOfClass(const UObject *WorldContextObject, TSubclassOf<AActor> ActorClass, TArray<AActor*> &OutActors)`

- `SpawnEmitterAtLocation()` / `SpawnEmitterAttached()`
  - See [SpawnEmitter](#SpawnEmitter)

# Actors

### Spawning Actors 
  
#### `SpawnActor<T>(UClass, …)`

  - [Documentation](https://docs.unrealengine.com/4.27/en-US/ProgrammingAndScripting/ProgrammingWithCPP/UnrealArchitecture/Actors/Spawning/ )

  - This creates a new object of class UClass but returns it of type T, *which allows us to create BP class objects and reference them in C++ using C++ declared parent objects.*

  - **Tip:** Use this in conjunction with a property of type `TSubclassOf<T>`, which will then be of type `UClass`. Then assign the class type in UE editor to a BP child of that parent class.
  
  - **Note:** Remember to check against nullptr

  - Example:
  ```cpp
    // BPProjectileClass is a property of type TSubclassOf<AProjectile> which we assign in UE editor.
    AProjectile *BPProjectileInstance = GetWorld()->SpawnActor<AProjectile>(BPProjectileClass, spawnLocation, spawnRotation );
  ```

### Actor Tags

 - Actors contain an array of strings called "Actor Tags"

 - Useful in filtering / selecting actors among sets

 - Example: `SomeActor->ActorHasTag("tagname")`

### DefaultSceneRoot

 - Type `USceneComponent`

 - The component that defines the transform of this Actor in the world, all other components must be attached to this one somehow

 - Assignable as `RootComponent` in C++

## Actor Classes

### AActor
  
  - Base Class. 

  - Store transform information in RootComponent. 

  - Can be replaced with any `USceneComponent` (or derived class)

  - Actors don't have a hierarachy among themselves. Hierarchys are implemented through their components

#### Actor Methods

- `AddActorLocalOffset` 
  - Adds a delta to the location of this component in its local reference frame.
  - `bSweep` 
    - Whether to trigger overlaps between current an new locations. 
    - **Only the root component is swept and checked for blocking collision, child components move without sweeping.**
  - `bTeleport`
    - Whether to teleport the physics state (if physics enabled)
    - If true, physics velocity for this object is unchanged (so ragdoll parts are not affected by change in location). If false, physics velocity is updated based on the change in position (affecting ragdoll parts).

- `FTakeAnyDamageSignature OnTakeAnyDamage`
  - **[Multicast Delegate](#multicast-delegate)**
  - Example:
  ```
    // when this object receives damage, the delegate will call our defined method DamageTaken 
    GetOwner()->OnTakeAnyDamage.AddDynamic(this, &UHealthComponent::DamageTaken);
  ```

- `SetOwner()`
  - Actors don't have hierarchy, instead have ownership.
  - Mostly relevent for Damage and Multiplayer

- `GetInstigatorController()` - Needed for `ApplyDamage`

- `SetActorHiddenInGame(bool)` - hides actor

- `SetActorTickEnabled(bool)` - enables/disables tick call

## APawn : AActor

  Pawn is the base class of all actors that can be possessed by Players or AI. Pawns are controlled by Controllers  

#### Pawn Methods

- `APawn::SetupPlayerInputComponent` 
  - Allows a Pawn to set up custom input bindings. Called upon possession by a [UPlayerController](#player-controller) , using the `InputComponent` created by `CreatePlayerInputComponent()`.
  - implement function override to bind player input to pawn
  - Action Input Events:
  ```cpp
    enum EInputEvent
    {
        IE_Pressed        =0,
        IE_Released       =1,
        IE_Repeat         =2,
        IE_DoubleClick    =3,
        IE_Axis           =4,
        IE_MAX            =5,
    }
  ```
  - `BindAxis()`
    - Example: `PlayerInputComponent->BindAxis(TEXT("MoveForward"), this, &ATank::Move);`
    - NOTE: Joystick axis input will be frame-rate independent. Need to Account for variable framerate

  - `BindAction`
    - Example: `PlayerInputComponent->BindAction(TEXT("Jump"), EInputEvent::IE_Pressed, this, &ACharacter::Jump);`

- `APawn::AddControllerPitchInput(float)` 
  - Look Up
  - Does NOT account for framerate 

- `APawn::AddControllerYawInput(float)` 
  - Look left/right
  - Does NOT account for framerate

- `APawn::AddMovementInput(float)` 
  - Sets the forward direction vector input
  - DOES account for framerate

## ACharacter : APawn

  Characters are Pawns that have a humanoid mesh, collision, and built-in movement logic. They are responsible for all physical interaction between the player or AI and the world, and also implement basic networking and input models.

  *They are designed for a vertically-oriented player representation that can walk, jump, fly, and swim* using [CharacterMovementComponent](#UCharacterMovementComponent).

- [Documentation](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/GameFramework/ACharacter/)

#### Character Movement Functions:

- `ACharacter::Jump(float)`

## Controllers

  Controllers are non-physical Actors that can possess a **Pawn** (or derived class). By default, there is a one-to-one relationship between Controllers and Pawns; meaning, each Controller controls only one Pawn at any given time.

#### Methods:

- `ControlRotation` sets the Pawn rotation

- `GetPlayerViewPoint()`  Returns Player's Point of View. 
  - For the AI this means the Pawn's 'Eyes' ViewPoint
  - For a Human player, this means the Camera's ViewPoint

### AI Controllers
  
  See [AI Controllers](./unreal-ai.md#ai-controllers)

### Player Controllers
  
  - Accepts player input and issues commands to Player Pawn
  - **Autoposses Player** sets player pawn automatically at beginning of level

#### Player Controller Methods

  - `GetHitResultUnderCursor()` Gets the hit result under cursor, (i.e. top down ARPG)

  - `SetupPlayerInputComponent()` - binds player input to pawn.
    - Example:
    ```cpp
    // This binds the Move Forward input axis (defined in Project Settings) to call ATank::Move on this
    PlayerInputComponent->BindAxis(TEXT("MoveForward"), this, &ATank::Move);
    ```

## TargetPoint

  - An Actor with no default behavior
  - Useful as spawn points

# Camera

- Players' camera must be "activated"

- Best done in Blueprint

### SpringArm

- Controls camera w/r/t player or whatever

- Set Camera Lag and Rotation on springarm to give sense of inertia to camera

- "Use Pawn Control Rotation" automatically sets camera rotation to parent pawn

- Camera should always look downl SpringArm

- "Socket Offset" can offset spring arm origin so an offset camera will connect straight to player (ie over the shoulder). So that in Over the should set up, the spring arm (and camera) compresses toward the player, instead of straight ahead.

### CameraShake

- **Tip:** Easier to create and tweak properties in editer. So create a Blueprint of the camera shake object (ie BP_MyCameraShake)

### MatineeCameraShake : UCameraShakeBase

- Set Oscillation Properties to control shake
  
  - Good starting blueprint values: `Duration=0.25`, `inTime=0.1`, `outTime=0.11`
  - `Location Oscillation` sets amplitude and frequency
  - `Rotation` and `FOV Oscillation` can cause motion sickness

  - **Note:** Camera shaking is best configured in Editor, so we use `UPROPERTY` to define and set the implementation class, which we can then access and call in c++

  - `ClientStartCameraShake()` Example:
    - We reference **MatineeCameraShake** by declaring a `UPROPERTY() TSubclassOf<BaseClass>` and then setting that property in the Editor to the Blueprint object (ie BP_MyCameraShake)
  ```cpp
    // Header
    // We set this UPROPERTY in the editor to a BP class we define and configure for camera shaking
    UPROPERTY(EditAnywhere)
    TSubclassOf<class UCameraShakeBase> MyCameraShakePropertyClass;

    // Implementation
    if (MyCameraShakePropertyClass != nullptr) {
      GetPlayerController()->ClientStartCameraShake(MyCameraShakePropertyClass);
    }
  ```

# Components

## Component Base Classes

  - Components default to NOT update on tick. Must set `PrimaryComponentTick.bCanEverTick = true;` in the class constructor. Set to `false` to save performance, if tick updating not needed.

### UActorComponent : UObject

  - The **Base Component Class** for components that can be added to actors as properties.

  - **NOTE:** *No Tranform* and *No Attachment* capability

  - Useful for simple Components that only hold and manage data (i.e. Health)

### USceneComponent : UActorComponent 

  - Has **Transform** and supports **Attachments**

  - No **Rendering** or **Collision**

#### USceneComponent Methods

  - `SetupAttachment()` 
    - Accepts parent to attach to component. 
    - Should only be called from its Owning Actor's constructor

  - `AttachToComponent()`
    - Callable at runtime
    - Calling from Actor will use actor's root component

### UPrimitiveComponent : USceneComponent 

  - [Documentation](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/Components/UPrimitiveComponent/)

  - Child of Scene, which also contain or generate geometry.

  - Used to be rendered or used with collision data

#### UPrimitiveComponent Methods

  - `FComponentHitSignature OnComponentHit`
    - **[Multicast Delegate](#multicast-delegate)** *(callback must be a `UFUNCTION()`)*
    - Requires `CollisionEnabledQueryAndPhysics` to be enabled for collision on the calling object
    - For collisions during physics simulation to generate hit events, **Simulation Generates Hit Events** must be enabled for this component. 
    - **Note:** `NormalImpulse` will be filled in for physics-simulating bodies, but will be zero for swept-component blocking collisions.
    - Example binding:
    ```cpp
      BaseMeshComponent->OnComponentHit.AddDynamic(this, &AProjectile::OnHit);
    ```
      - Where `OnHit` is the callback we defined

### UCharacterMovementComponent

  - `#include "GameFramework/CharacterMovementComponent.h"`

  - [Documentation](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/GameFramework/UCharacterMovementComponent/)
  
  - To stop an AI controller pawn, `StopMovement()` + `DisableMovement()`. Will stop current movement immediately, and disable acceleration

### UProjectileMovementComponent

  - `#include "GameFramework/ProjectileMovementComponent.h"`

  - [Documentation](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/GameFramework/UProjectileMovementComponent/)

  - Can set on Actor with Tick disabled, which then moves the component *withou* updating the Actor's tick

### UPhysicsHandleComponent

  - `#include "PhysicsEngine/PhysicsHandleComponent.h"`

  - [Documentation](#https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/PhysicsEngine/UPhysicsHandleComponent/)

  - ActorComponent Subclass to add interface for grabbability, rotation etc. 

  - **Tip:** Then can get it in C++ using 
      ```
      GetOwner()->FindComponentByClass<UPhysicsHandleComponent >()
      ```

### OtherComponents

  - **[UCapsuleComponent](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/Components/UCapsuleComponent/) : USceneComponent**

  - **[UStaticMeshComponent](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/Components/UStaticMeshComponent/) : USceneComponent**

# GameMode

> “GameMode is a blueprint class that controls how a player enters the game. For example, in a multiplayer game, you would use Game Mode to determine where each player spawns. More importantly, the Game Mode determines which Pawn the player will use.”

### GameModeBase

- Base class sufficient for Single Player

- Sets player spawn class for a level

- Can override per-level in World Settings, or for entire game in Project Settings

- **Tip:** Set DefaultGameMode in project settings

- **NOTE:** WorldSettings has a GameMode override, which can interfere with spawn point and "Play From Here" Viewport function.

### GameMode : GameModeBase

- Child class, includes **Match State** and **Multiplayer Matches**

# Level

> Levels contain other Actors and provide the environment for your game's players.

# Particles

- Can be assigned to a socket on a skeletal mesh
- Can be Activated / Deactivated

## SpawnEmitter

SpawnEmitterAtLocation / SpawnEmitterAttached
  
  - Spawns a **`UParticleSystem`**
  
  - Defaults to spawn one particle effect, but can spawn multiple
  
  - Fire and forget (crreation and deletion is handled)

  - `SpawnEmitterAttached` can attach directly to socket

## UParticleSystem 

  - `#include "Particles/ParticleSystem.h"`

  - [Documentation](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/Particles/UParticleSystem/)

  - **Not a component.**

  - Created with `SpawnEmitterAtLocation`

  - **Note:** Even though an emitter default is spawn once and destroy, if a Particle System is set to repeat, it may never end (i.e. a flame).

## UParticleSystemComponent

  - `#include "Particles/ParticleSystemComponent.h"`

  - [Documentation](https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-US/API/Runtime/Engine/Particles/UParticleSystemComponent/)

  - Created with `CreateDefaultSubobject`

  - Can attach to a component.

  - Emits particles.

  - Uses a template. 

# Sound

  - `#include "Sound/SoundBase.h"`

  - See also [Sounds](./unreal-engine-notes.md#sounds)

### USoundBase

  - Sound base class

# Timer

Use `FTimerManager` and `FTimerHandle` to setup timer event scheduling. The FTimer class contains references to world timer functions.

### FTimerHandle

`#include "Engine/EngineTypes.h"`

## TimerManager

`#include "TimerManager.h"`

### FTimerManager

  - `SetTimer(...)` sets the timer

  - Can access via `AActor::GetWorldTimerManager` or `UWorld::GetTimerManager`

### FTimerDelegate

  - Use to bind callbacks with parameters

  - Create with `::CreateUObject()`

  - Example:
  ```cpp
  FTimerDelegate PlayerStartTimerDelegate = FTimerDelegate::CreateUObject(ToonTanksPlayerController, &AToonTanksPlayerController::SetPlayerEnabledState, true);
  // Where `ToonTanksPlayerController` is the object that’s called on
  ```

### FTimer

`#include "RenderCore.h"`

# Trace

- Can be either a **line trace** or **Sweep** (aka shape trace)

- **Note:** By default CharacterClasses ignores trace hits. To fix, change **Collision** of components you want to collide with from **Pawn** to **Custom**. Then change **Visibilty Trace** from **Ignore** to **Block** (or Overlap)

### **LineTraceByChannel**

- Return Bool is the same as OutHit.BlockingHit

#### Trace Channel

- Groups traceability of objects and collision/overlap behaviors

- Can add channels in **Project Settings > Trace Channel**

- Useful channel: `ECollisionChannel::ECC_Visibility`

- Editor / c++ channel name mappings can be found in `[ProjectDirectory]/Config/DefaultEngine.ini`

### LineTraceByObjectType

- Less flexibility than by channel. 

# Volume

### TriggerVolumeActor

- Volume to trigger game events

- **Tip:** Make visible while editing

### PostProcessingVolume

- Can apply post processing details to specific volumes in level

# UWorld

- **WorldContextObject** - all instanced objects in a world can be a WorldContextObject, so can pass `this` from any instance to provide the World Context

- **TimeSeconds** - in-game time, changes with pauses, game speed, etc...

### UWorld::GetWorld

`UWorld * GetWorld()` - Callable from inside Actor, Components, etc dsnfjkl;ndsajndfjk;lnadsjkl;fnjnk;zxdgfnj
